#summary What's left of the computer code verification

= Introduction =

There are three pieces of computer code in the proof of the Kepler conjecture.  They are

 # Hypermap generator
 # Linear programming
 # Nonlinear multivariate inequalities

The status of the formal verification of these programs is discussed on this page.

The primary contributors to the computer code verification have been

 * G. Bauer
 * T. Nipkow
 * A. Solovyev

= Status of the Hypermap Generator code verification project =

Bauer and Nipkow have completed the formal verification of  the classification of tame
hypermaps in Isabelle/HOL.  More recently, Nipkow reworked the formal verification to adapt it to the second generation proof, described in "Dense Sphere Packings: a blueprint" (Fall 2010).
(One constant has been changed in 2011 in the array d(6), but this is a minor change that
can be deferred until the very end of the project.)

== Integration with Text ==

The following results in *Section Generation* of *Chapter Hypermap* require formalization.
 * QRDYXY (19 lines)
 * AQIUNPP (70 lines)
 * QZHDZVO (3 lines)
 * XKABSJX (7 lines)
 * RFLGXTI (1 line)
 * PSZUDYT (32 lines)
 * VHTHIOG (2 lines)
 * DMFMDYP (32 lines)
 * CHAKYSS (13 lines)

The formalization of the last few of these will rely on the (import to HOL of the) Bauer-Nipkow results.

== Integration of HOL Light and Isabelle ==

The definitions used to express the classification of tame hypermaps have been imported (by hand) into HOL Light. This makes it possible to express the classification result in HOL Light.  It is possible to complete the formalization in HOL Light by assuming the Bauer-Nipkow result as a postulate.  But
perhaps there are more satisfactory ways to integrate the parts of the proof into a coherent whole.


= Status of the Linear Programming code verification project = 

A. Solovyev has completed the linear programming part of the project (6/2013).


= Status of the Nonlinear Multivariate inequality code verification project = 

Alexey Solovyev has tools up and running that are capable of verifying multivariate
nonlinear inequalities in HOL Light (Feb 2012). 
There are hundreds of inequalities to be verified in this way.
It is estimated to be a 20,000 hour computer calculation.


== Integration with Text ==

Results from appendix on Deformations of local fans

 * ~~WEECNNS~~ JH 6/30/2013
 * IHWVUIZ 
 * NHCXLRV
 * WNWSHJT
 * ~~CREUXCQ~~ not needed, not formalized
 * ~~VUYCADE~~ TCH 6/2013
 * ~~YBTASCZ~~ TCH 6/2013
 * ~~KCZXLLE~~ TCH 6/2013
 * ~~FSQKWKK~~ TCH 6/2013
 * ~~MKIFWJT~~ (HLT Fan.sum3 azim fan)
 * ~~XIVPHKS~~ JH 6/2013
 * ITNZZRD (22 lines)

The *Main Estimate Section*  of the *Local Fan Chapter* contains the following lemmas that need formal verification.

 * ~~WJSCPRO (36 lines)~~ HLT 4/2012
 * ~~TECOXBM (9 lines)~~ HLT 4/2012
 * ~~HDPLYGY (3 lines)~~ HLT 5/2012
 * ~~GBYCPXS (10 lines)~~ HLT 5/2012
 * ~~MTUWLUN (13 lines)~~ HLT 5/2012
 * ~~ESMGBKI (4 lines)~~ not formalized and not needed in the formalization
 * ~~YPKHQKB (5 lines)~~ not formalized and not needed in the formalization
 * ~~ODXLSTC (5 lines) superseded by (v2) below~~ not formalized, not needed
 * ~~IMJXPHR (9 lines) superseded by (v2) below~~ not needed, not formalized
 * ~~NUXCOEA (9 lines) superseded by (v2) below~~ not needed, not formalized
 * ~~VPWSHTO (10 lines)~~ HLT 6/2012
 * ~~LFJCIXP (4 lines)~~ HLT 6/2012
 * ~~OWZLKVY (13 lines)~~ TCH 4/2013

An appendix on the proof of the main estimate gives further details about a computer program
that runs through the cases.  This appendix was added 5/2012 and expanded 7/1/2013.  
It contains the following additional material.

 * ~~PCRTTID (1 line)~~ HLT 6/2012
 * ~~HDPLYGYv2 (1 line)~~ HLT
 * ~~AYQJTMD (3 lines)~~ HLT 
 * ~~BJOQBJU (25 lines)~~ not needed, not formalized
 * ~~UAGHHBM (3 lines)~~ HLT

 * ~~GKFMJLC~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~SGTRNAF~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~EAPGLEJ~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~JKQEWGV~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~QKNVMLB~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~FZIOTEF~~ TCH 5/2013
 * ~~EQTTNZI~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~UAGHHBM~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~YXIONXL~~ HLT 6/26/2013
 * ~~LKGRQUI~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~ODXLSTCv2~~ HLT 6/2013
 * IMJXPHRv2 (11 lines)
 * NUXCOEAv2 (13 lines)
 * ~~TECOXBM~~ HLT 6/2013
 * ~~KPIDBQH~~ TCH 6/2013
 * ~~DRNDRDV~~ TCH 6/2013
 * ~~TBRMXRZ~~ TCH 6/2013
 * PQCSXWG (35 lines)
 * ~~EYYPQDW~~ HLT 6/27/2013
 
Results from Check completeness:

 * FEKTYIY (4 lines)
 * AURSIPD (7 lines)
 * PPBTYDQ (10 lines)
 * MXQTIED (4 lines)
 * XWNHLMD (2 lines)
 * ~~SYNQIWN~~ TCH 6/2013
 * OIQKKEP (3 lines)
 * AXJRPNC (15 lines)
 * RRCWNS (11 lines) weak version complete
 * JCYFMRP (8 lines)
 * TFITSKC (10 lines)
 * CQAOQLR (2 lines)
 * JLXFDM (4 lines)
 * WKEIDFT (2 lines)
 * PEDSLGV (1 line)
 * AQICLXA (1 line)
 * FUNOUYH (2 lines)
 * OEHDBEN (15 lines)
 * OTMTOTJ (8 lines)
 * HIJQAHA (14 lines)
 * CNICGSF (3 lines)
 * ARDBZYE (17 lines)
 * FYSSVEV (4 lines)
 * AUEAHEH (1 line)
 * ZNLLLDL (1 line)
 * VQFYMZY (4 lines)
 * CNFNTYP (2 lines)
 * BNAWVNH (3 lines)
 * RAWZDIB (3 lines)
 * MFKLVDK (3 lines)
 * RYPDIXT (3 lines)
 * GSXRFWM (4 lines)
 * WGDHPPI (2 lines)
 * ASSWPOW (9 lines)
 * TUAPYYU (4 lines)
 * UFGHLP (1 line)
 * DSZPJSK (14 lines)
 * WKZZEEH ( 4 lines)
 * RDLGWIE (7 lines)
 * LFYPZPI (13 lines)
 * NZBSJXG ( 2 lines)
 * NWDGKXH (9 lines)
 * EFLYGAU (4 lines)
 * YOBIMPP (5 lines)
 * BJTDWPS (7 lines)
 * MIQMCSN (2 lines)
 * LFLACKU (5 lines)
 * OCBICBY (5 lines)
 * JEJTVGB (11 lines)
 * HGDRXAN (combined with JEJTVGB)

End of main estimate.