#This is an introduction to the Flyspeck Project, whose purpose is to give a formal proof of the Kepler Conjecture.

= The Flyspeck Project Fact Sheet =



[http://groups-beta.google.com/group/flyspeck Flyspeck Google Group]



== Introduction ==

The purpose of the flyspeck project is to produce a formal proof 
of the Kepler Conjecture.  This page gives some basic facts about this project.


== *What does the name mean?* ==


The name `flyspeck' comes from matching the pattern /f.*p.*k/
against a English dictionary.   FPK in turn is an acronym for "The Formal Proof
of Kepler."  The term `flyspeck' can mean to
_examine closely or
in minute detail; or to scrutinize_
The term is thus quite appropriate
for a project intended to scrutinize the minute details of a mathematical
proof.


== *What is a formal proof?* =

A formal proof is understood
in the sense of the [http://www.cs.kun.nl/~freek/qed/qed.html QED manifesto]

To learn more about formal proofs, see
[http://www.cs.kun.nl/~freek Freek Wiedijk's web pages]
Also see the complete [http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/jrh/ works of John Harrison.]


== *How does a formal proof differ from a traditional mathematical proof?* ==


Traditional mathematical proofs are written in a way to make them
easily understood by mathematicians.  Routine logical steps are omitted.
An enormous amount of context is assumed on the part of the reader.
Proofs, especially in topology and geometry, rely on intuitive arguments
in situations where a trained mathematician would be capable of translating
those intuitive arguments into a more rigorous argument.

In a formal proof, all the intermediate logical steps are supplied.
No appeal is made to intuition, even if the translation from intuition
to logic is routine.
Thus, a formal proof is less intuitive, and yet less susceptible to
logical errors.


== *What are the specific tools that will be used in the flyspeck project?* ==


All the formal proofs will be made by computer and programmed in the
Objective CAML programming language.


The steps of the proof will be generated by computer programs using
John Harrison's HOL light software package, with contributions from other systems such
as Coq and Isabelle, as described below.

The design of the proof will be based on the 1998
(traditional-style) proof of the Kepler Conjecture by Hales and Ferguson.


== *What is the Kepler Conjecture?*=

The Kepler Conjecture asserts that the density of a packing of
congruent spheres in three dimensions is never greater than
<code>pi/sqrt(18)</code>, or approximately 0.74048.
This is the oldest problem in discrete geometry and is an
important part of <a href="http://babbage.clarku.edu/~djoyce/hilbert/">Hilbert's 18th problem.</a>
An example of a packing achieving this density is the
face-centered cubic packing.
<p>
The problem remained unsolved for nearly 400 years until it was finally
cracked in 1998.



== *Why give a formal proof of the Kepler Conjecture?* ==

The proof of the Kepler Conjectures is one of the most complicated
mathematical proofs that has ever been produced.

The Annals of Mathematics solicited the paper for publication in 1998
and hosted a conference in January 1999
that was devoted to understanding the proof.
A panel of 12 referees was assigned to the task of verifying the correctness
of the proof.

After four full years, Gabor Fejes T&oacute;th,
the chief referee, returned a report
stating that he was 99% certain of the correctness of the proof, but
that the team had been unable to completely certify the proof.

Robert MacPherson, editor of the Annals, wrote a report that states<br>

 ``The news from the referees is bad, from my perspective.  They have not been able to certify the correctness of
  the proof, and will not be able to certify it in the future,
  because they have run out of energy to devote to the problem.  This is not what I had hoped for.''


He continues with comments to Hales that may well mark a profound change in the
way that mathematics is done:

<I>``The referees put a level of energy into this that is, in my
    experience, unprecedented.  They ran a seminar on it for a
long time.  A number of people were involved, and they
worked hard.  They checked many local statements in the
proof, and each time they found that what you claimed was
in fact correct.  Some of these local checks were highly
non-obvious at first, and required weeks to see that they
worked out.  The fact that some of these worked out is the
basis for the 99% statement of Fejes T&oacute;th that you cite.
One can speculate whether their process would have
converged to a definite answer had they had a more clear
manuscript from the beginning, but this doesn't matter now.</I>
<p>
<i>
    ``Fejes T&oacute;th thinks that this situation will occur more and
more often in mathematics.  He says it is similar to the
situation in experimental science - other scientists acting
as referees can't certify the correctness of an experiment,
they can only subject the paper to consistency checks.  He
thinks that the mathematical community will have to get
used to this state of affairs.</i>
    <p>
    <i>
``You may ask whether this degree of certification is enough
checking for a mathematical paper, and whether it's not in
fact comparable to the level of checking for most
mathematical papers.  Both the referees and the Editors
think that it's not enough for complete certification as
correct, for two reasons.  First, rigor and certainty was
what this particular problem was about in the first place.
Second, there are not so many general principles and
theoretical consistencies as there were, say, in the proof
of Fermat, so as to make you convinced that even if there
is a small error, it won't affect the basic structure of
the proof.''
</i>

<p>
The Annals is confident enough in the correctness that they
will publish a paper on the proof.  However, this paper has brought about a change in
the journal's policy on computer proof.  It will no longer attempt to check the
correctness of computer code.<p>

There is a way to proceed that more fully
preserves the integrity of mathematics.
This is the way of formal proof.

<p>
<b>What is Objective CAML?</b>
<p>

CAML light is a functional programming language in the ML family.
Tutorials on CAML can be found at the bottom of this page.
The Objective CAML language was selected for this project
because HOL light is written in this
language.

<p>
<b>What is HOL light?</b>
<p>

HOL light is a computer program that produces carefully checked mathematical
theorems.
HOL light is John Harrison's reimplementation of HOL in the Objective CAML language. HOL light was selected for the project because

<UL>

        <LI>The system is built on a small kernel, and the type
        checking insures that no fatal bugs can occur outside the
        kernel.  That is, if you leave a bug in your code, the worst
        that can happen is that you will fail to prove a theorem
        you hoped to prove.  You can never put a bug in your code
        that yields a false statement.
    <LI>The system becomes self-checking after the first thousand lines of
    code. 
    <LI> The source code is short and quite readable.
        Thus, any questions about
        the behavior of the system can be resolved through the
        syntax and semantics of the underlying language (Objective CAML).
        <LI>Objective CAML is a pleasant language to work with.
        <LI>The code is highly portable.
        <LI>The system is readily extensible.
        <LI>The system performed well under informal tests.
        <LI>
        Legend has it that Harrison produced his
        proof in HOL light
        of the <i>fundamental theorem of algebra</i> in a single
        weekend.
</UL>

In the system there is a "theorem" data type.
Each value of this type is the statement of a
mathematical theorem.  The type checking system in Objective CAML prevents
the creation of a value of this type, except by rules that insure that
the statement has a proof.
<p>
Thus, for instance, if someone succeeds in creating a
theorem value in HOL light
expressing
the statement 'The Riemann hypothesis is true,' then the world can be
confident that the Riemann hypothesis is true.
<p>
Using the HOL light code, functions can be written in Objective 
CAML whose output
are values of type theorem.  For instance, it is possible to write a function
<CODE>approx_pi</CODE>
whose input is an integer n and whose output has type `theorem`
<CODE>`|- abs(pi- x) &lt; 10^-n`,</code>
where x is a rational number.  That is, it produces a proof
that a given rational
approximation to pi is valid.  (Such a function has
been written by Harrison.)

<p>
<B>How does HOL light differ from packages such
    as Mathematica?</B><p>

In Mathematica, it is also possible to write a procedure whose input is
n and whose output is a rational number x such that
<CODE>abs(pi-x) &lt; 10^-n.</CODE>
However, the Mathematica procedure
<code>ApproxPi[n_]:=Rationalize[N[Pi,n+1],10^-n]</code>
relies on algorithms that are
unknown origin and unknown reliability.  What does <code>N[Pi,n+1]</code> do
behind the scenes?
How reliable is it?  Can you prove this line of code
always does what you wanted?
Or do you detect a subtle bug?
<p>
In HOL light, by the time it returns a value of type `theorem`
<code>`|- abs(pi-x) &lt; 10^-n`</code>
the computer has checked every logical step in the derivation.  Thus,
results obtained form HOL light are much more reliable than those in
Mathematica.

<p>
<B>What is the goal of the flyspeck project?</B>
<p>

The purpose of the flyspeck project is to produce a value of type `theorem`
in HOL light that expresses the statement 'The Kepler Conjecture is true.'

<p>
<B>How large a project is the flyspeck project?</b>
<p>

The project may take as many as 20 work-years to complete.

<p>
<b><a name="update"></a>How far along is the project?  Here are some recent developments. (Updated October 2005)</b>
<ul>
<li><a href="http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/jrh/">John Harrison</a> 
has released <a href="http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/jrh/hol-light/index.html">version 2.0</a> of HOL Light.  
It contains
many significant improvements over the previous version, including
analysis in Euclidean spaces, and improved handling of the elementary theory
of the real numbers.</li>

<li><a href="http://www4.in.tum.de/~bauerg/">Gertrud Bauer's</a> thesis gives a HOL
formalization of Hales's java programs for generating tame plane graphs and partially 
<a href="http://www.dagstuhl.de/files/Materials/05/05021/05021.NipkowTobias.Paper.pdf">verifies</a> them.
She has used the <a href="http://isabelle.in.tum.de">Isabelle</a> theorem proving
system for this work.</li>

<li><a href="http://www4.informatik.tu-muenchen.de/~nipkow/">Tobias Nipkow</a> 
is spent the fall semester 2005 at the University of Pittsburgh
with Tom Hales.  On December 19, 2005, building on the work in Gertrud Bauer's thesis, Nipkow 
<a href="http://www.in.tum.de/~nipkow/pubs/Flyspeck/">verified the
enumeration of all tame plane
graphs.</a></li>  This completes the formal verification of a major part of the Kepler
Conjecture.


<li><a href="http://www.lix.polytechnique.fr/~zumkeller/">Roland Zumkeller</a> 
is working on the formal proof of <a href="http://www.lix.polytechnique.fr/~zumkeller/flyspeck/">nonlinear inequalities</a> that
are found in the proof of the Kepler conjecture.</li>

<li><a href="http://www4.in.tum.de/~obua/">Steven Obua</a> 
has integrated linear programming with Isabelle/HOL so that he
is able to give <a href="http://www4.in.tum.de/~obua/tphol2005_lp.pdf">formal verification of linear programming bounds.</a></li>

<li><a href="http://www.math.pitt.edu/~thales/">Tom Hales</a> has produced a formal proof of the Jordan Curve theorem in HOL Light (included in version 2.0 of HOL Light),
which is one step of the proof of the Kepler conjecture.</li>

<li>As participation in the flyspeck project grows, other formal
theorem proving systems have been added (<a href="http://coq.inria.fr/">Coq</a>, <a href="http://isabelle.in.tum.de">Isabelle</a>).  
The eventual aim will be to
get the different systems to communicate meaningfully, and bring the project
to a unified conclusion.</li>

</ul>
<p>

<p>
<b>Should I get involved?</b>
<p>
This is an undertaking of that has the potential to develop into
one of historical proportions.  It is not the
sort of project that can be completed by a single individual.  Instead
it will require the collective efforts of a large and dedicated team over
a long period.  We are actively recruiting collaborators and team members.
<p>
We are looking for mathematicians (from the advanced undergraduate level
up) who are computer literate, and who are interested in transforming
the way that mathematics is done.
<p>
Are you excited about the QED manifesto?  Are you interested in applying
the manifesto to a problem of great historical significance?  Please
become involved!  We need your help.

<p>
<b>How do I get involved?</b>
<p>

The first step is to learn the relevant background material:
    <UL>
        <LI>Objective CAML,
        <LI>HOL light, and
        <LI>the idea of the proof of the Kepler Conjecture.
    </ul>
See the resources
listed at the bottom of the page
for more information about these topics.
<p>
The second step is to become an experienced user.  In practical terms,
this means being able to create your own proof in the HOL light system.
<p>
If you have successfully proved a non-trivial theorem
in the HOL light system, then
contact Thomas C. Hales (http://www.math.pitt.edu/~thales)
if you wish to participate.
<p>




<B><H2>Resources</H2></b>
<b>Objective CAML</b>
    <UL>
        Learn to program in Objective CAML
    <li>The official <a href="http://caml.inria.fr/">CAML website</a>
    <li><a href="http://caml.inria.fr/ocaml/htmlman-beta/">Online documentation</a>
    <li><a href="http://www.cs.caltech.edu/courses/cs134/cs134b/book.pdf">
    Introduction to the Objective Caml Programming Language</a> by Jason Hickey (pdf book)
    <li><a href="http://caml.inria.fr/oreilly-book/">Developing Applications with Objective Caml</a> (O'Reilly book)
    <li>
<a href="http://caml.inria.fr/tutorial/">Functional Programming using Caml light</a>
<li><a href="http://www.math.pitt.edu/~thales/flyspeck/caml2.pdf">A Quick Guide to CAML</a>
    <li><a href="http://caml.inria.fr/FAQ/exemples-eng.html"> 100 Lines of Caml</a>
    <li>There are a number of good resources in French, such as the books
    "Le langage Caml" and "Manual de r&eacute;f&eacute;rence du langage Caml" by X. Leroy and P. Weis
    </ul>
<p>


<b>HOL light</b>
<UL>
     <li>The official <a href="http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/jrh/hol-light/index.html">HOL-Light site</a> 
        <li>Learn to write HOL light proofs
    <a href="http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/jrh/hol-light/manual-1.1.pdf">Manual (PDF)</a>, Also in <a href="http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/jrh/hol-light/manual-1.1.dvi.gz">.dvi</a> and <a href="http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/jrh/hol-light/manual-1.1.ps.gz">.ps</a>.
                 	<li><a href = "hol_light_2005_ver20.tar.gz">Download</a> HOL light 2005 (Version 2.0 release)
<li>Harrison's <a href="harrison_tutorial_200.pdf">tutorial</a> on HOL-Light

            </ul>

<p>
<b>The Kepler Conjecture</b>
            <ul>
                <LI><a href="http://www.ams.org/notices/200004/fea-hales.pdf ">"Cannonballs and Honeycombs"</a>
                An introduction for a general mathematical audience to the ideas of the proof of the Kepler Conjecture.
                <LI><a href="http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.MG/9811071">A historical overview</a> of the Kepler Conjecture, tracing the problem
                to a pamphlet published by Kepler in 1611.
                <LI><a href="http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.MG/9811078">The mathematical text of the proof.</a>
                <LI>Google search for
                <a href="http://www.google.com/search?sourceid=navclient&amp;q=Hales+Kepler">web material</a> about
                Hales's 1998 proof.
    </UL>

<p>
<b>Books giving Geometry background</b>  The first two books are intended for undergraduates.
<ul>
<LI>Euclidean and non-euclidean geometry: an analytic approach, by Patrick Ryan<br>
   This is an undergraduate level textbook that gives useful background in spherical trigonometry
<LI>Euclidean Geometry and Convexity, by Russell Benson<br>
   An undergraduate level treatment length, plane area, surface area, volume, and convex bodies.
<LI>Algorithmic Geometry, by J-D Boissonat and M. Yvinec<br>
    This book gives algorithms for finding convex hulls, linear programming, triangulations, Voronoi diagrams, Delaunay triangulations
<LI>Computational Geometry: algorithms and applications, by M. de Berg et al.<br>
    This book covers 
     convex hulls, line segment intersections, polygon triangulations, linear programming, Voronoi diagrams, Delauany triangulations, binary space partitions
<LI>Lagerungen in der Ebene, auf der Kugel, und im Raum, by L. Fejes T&oacute;th<br>
    Ignore my other recommendations, and study this book before all others.
</ul>

    <p>
    <b>Popular Material On Flyspeck</b>
    <ul>
        <LI><a href="proof.txt">Proof and Beauty</a>  (Economist)
        <LI><a href="What_in_the_name_of_Euclid.pdf">What in the Name of Euclid is Going On Here?<a/>  (Science)
        <LI><a href="http://www.nature.com/cgi-taf/DynaPage.taf?file=/nature/journal/v424/n6944/full/424012a_fs.html">Mathematics: Does the Proof Stack up (Nature 3 July 2003)</a>
        <LI><a href="http://www.nzz.ch/2003/02/16/ft/page-article8N4JZ.html">Twenty Years for the Proof of a Proof (in German)</a>
        <LI><a href="20_Jahre_EN_final.txt">English translation of "Twenty Years"</a>
    (thanks to Sven Guckes for the translation)
        <LI><a href="science_magazine_1513a.pdf">Stacking Up the Evidence (Science 7 March 2003)</a>
         </ul>
         </body>
         </html> 