#summary Text Formalization Projects needed for completion of Flyspeck



= Guidelines =
  * Do not ever introduce new axioms.  If you need results from earlier chapters that have not been proved, introduce them as explicit assumptions in the statement of the theorem.  If there are assumptions you use more than once, make a definition containing the term, so that you can just type {{{my_assumption}}} for example, to enter it as an assumption.  You are not allowed to use assumptions to make the theorem easier to prove.  Only use assumptions for lemmas from earlier chapters that have not been proved yet.
  * Package the results up when you are done, using {{{THEN}}} and {{{THENL}}}.

= Trig Chapter = 
(This chapter is complete)
  * John Harrison (arg, azim)
  * Jason Rute,
  * Nguyen Quang Truong, complete
  * Euler's solid angle formula, Diep, Ky, 
  * Hoang Le Truong has proved ULEKUUB, in a modified form.

= Volume Chapter = 

(This chapter has been completed.)
  * construction of measure: John Harrison (done)
  * primitive volumes: John Harrison (done)
  * solid angle, finiteness bounds: Nguyen Tat Thang  (done)

= Hypermap Chapter =
  * Tran Nam Trung, work in progress (long chapter)

= Fan Chapter =

(This chapter has been completed by Hoang Le Truong)

(John Harrison did the parts on polyhedra.)

  * There are a few odds and ends to be finished in this section: AMHFNXP, WBLARHH, BSXAQBQ and Hoang Le Truong is working on them.

= Packing = 
  * statement (done by Nguyen Tat Thang, John Harrison)
  * rogers partition (completed by Alexey Solovyev)
  * marchal's partition and kissing number estimates (function L M) KIZHLTL UPFZBZM (Ky)
  * /DLWCHEM/ polyhedral bounds on the number of spheres (13 or 14)  (Dat in progress) (renewed June 10 2010)

= Local Fan = 
  * (Nguyen Quang Truong)
  * WRGCVDR (Truong)
  * polygon perimeter, not done
  * polygon area
  * main estimate 
  * CKQOWSA (done by Alexey Solovyev)
  * SDCCMGA (Diep)

= local fan =




  * 2158872499  (Diep)

= Tame hypermap =

(Various people made contributions of particular lemmas, and then Alexey Solovyev did almost all of the chapter. Various small things remain to be completed.)

  * (Alexey Solovyev)
  *  /PPHEUFG/ A hypermap is tame if and only if its opposite is tame. (done by Trieu Thi Diep)
  *  /FATUGPD/ /FNJLBXS/ /FCDJDOT/  A counterexample can be "improved" by moving spheres inward. (Quyen in progress) 
   *   /SZIPOAS/ (done by Vu Quang Thanh, in quarantine for the use of CHEAT_TAC), 
   *  /CRTTXAT/ every face has cardinality at most 6.  (done Dang Tat Dat)


= Special Projects =
    


= nonlinear inequalities = 

There are many [NonlinearInequalities] that occur in the proof.  The list is much shorter in the 2009 proof.  The list requires formal verification.

There are four pieces of nonlinear inequality verification code.
  * [http://code.google.com/p/flyspeck/source/browse/#svn/trunk/interval_code Hales's code] from 1998, adapted to the Flyspeck project.  
  * Ferguson's code from 1997-1998, this has not been updated in several years.
  * [http://code.google.com/p/kepler-code/source/browse/#svn/trunk/src McLaughlin's ML version].  The especially relevant sections are in the directories taylor/ functions/ and seconds/.
  * [http://code.google.com/p/sergei/ Zumkeller's Berstein] polynomial approach.

= linear programming = 

The linear programming part of the proof is given in [http://code.google.com/p/flyspeck/source/browse/#svn/trunk/glpk ocaml linear programming].  This piece of code requires formalization.  Steven Obua has an Isabelle implementation of linear programming.  He has used it to treat over 90% of the cases that arise in the original 1998 proof of the Kepler conjecture.  His work needs to be adapted to the 2009 proof. 

Alexey Solovyev is close to completing the Linear Programming part of the proof.

= graph generator (completed by Bauer-Nipkow) = 

Bauer and Nipkow have a formal correctness proof of the graph generator in Isabelle.




== Integrating the Bauer-Nipkow project with Flyspeck ==

Roughly, the Bauer-Nipkow result assumes an algorithm for generating restricted hypermaps and based on that, they give a
correctness proof that the computer code correctly filters the tame hypermaps.  The chapter on hypermap gives an algorithm for generating restricted hypermaps.  This should be combined with the Bauer-Nipkow result.

  * The [http://afp.sourceforge.net/entries/Flyspeck-Tame.shtml Bauer-Nipkow classification] of tame plane graphs has been formalized in Isabelle.   This needs to be patched with HOL Light as follows:
  * The definitions of [http://afp.sourceforge.net/browser_info/current/HOL/Flyspeck-Tame/Plane.html planar graph] have been translated to HOL Light (see the file bauer_nipkow.hl in the flyspeck project hypermap subdirectory).  Let's call such a graph K98-planar.
  * The statement of the [http://afp.sourceforge.net/browser_info/current/HOL/Flyspeck-Tame/Completeness.html classification theorem] (which they call the "completeness theorem") has been translated to HOL Light.  Their theorem essentially states that a the face dump of every tame K98-planar graph is equivalent to one in the archive (which is a list of list of lists of integers).
  * The flypaper gives an algorithm for the generation of restricted hypermaps.  Every tame hypermap is restricted by definition.  The main point to be shown is that every restricted graph is K98-planar graph.  This should be done by interlacing the algorithm for restricted hypermaps with the iteration in Isabelle for K98-planar graphs.  There is a choice function that comes up in the algorithms (about which faces and edges to build on). It is important for these two choice functions to be compatibly chosen.