#summary This page gives a summary of the use of non-linear inequalities in the proof.
= Introduction =

This page gives the nonlinear inequalities used in the proof of the Kepler Conjecture (2009 version).  This is recent research and many of the inequalities have not been verified by interval arithmetic.  Grep for the identifier to find the files involved in the verification.

[http://code.google.com/p/flyspeck/source/browse/trunk/book_code/lp2009.cc  Source files] for gradient descent testing of linear programming bounds

[http://code.google.com/p/flyspeck/source/browse/trunk/book_code/marchal.cc  Source files] for gradient descent testing of inequalities in the main text

We mark each inequality, depending on its status

  * FP (formal proof completed), 
  * VE (verified by ordinary interval arithmetic), or 
  * GRAD (verified numerically by gradient descent).  
  * NV (no verification)

= Minor inequalities = 

 * An inequality approximating arc (cc:arc in tex files).  {{{STATUS_NV}}}
 * The disjointness of Marchal's disks (cc:disks in tex files). a + a' <= arc(2h,2h',2). {{{STATUS_NV}}}
 * A linear lower bound on the area of regular polygons (cc:alin in tex). We may replace n with a continuous variable n>=3.  The inequality can be cut off for some large n, because the partial derivative in n has fixed sign for large n.  {{{STATUS_NV}}}
 * A linear lower bound on the area of regular polygons (large disk) (cc:alin2 in tex). {{{STATUS_NV}}}

= Inequalities from Marchal's paper =

 * Marchal's k-cell inequality {{{gamma(X,M)}}} is non-negative. (cc:mar in tex files)
 * ID/1025009205/ Marchal's 4-cell inequality {{{GRAD}}}
 * ID/3564312720/ Marchal's 3-cell inequality {{{GRAD}}}

= Supercell Inequalities =

 * /GLFVCVK/ gammaL is nonnegative on non-quarters. (cc:qtr in tex) 
    * ID/4869905472/ gamma(3cell,L) >= 0. {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/2477216213/ gamma(4cell s.t. nonquarter,L) >= 0.  (The actual constraint is the exterior of a ball contained in the set of quarters). {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/8328676778/ gamma4Lbwt >= 0 for 4-cells of wt 1/2.
 * /FHBVYXZ/ 2-blade inequality: 
    * ID/1118115412/ gamma2(four-cell)+gamma2(three-cell) >= 0.   (cc:2bl in tex) {{{GRAD}}}
 * /BIXPCGW/ 3-blade inequalities:  (cc:3bl in tex) 
    * ID/2300537674/ if dih > 1.65, then gammaL > 0. {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/6652007036/ dih(4-cell along a critical edge) < 2.8 {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/7080972881/ dih(spine) > 2.3 ==> adjacent edges to spine are not critical {{{GRAD}}} 
    * ID/1738910218/ dih(spine) > 2.3 ==> opposite edge to spine is not critical {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/9455898160/ gamma4L(quarter) > -0.0057 {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/7274157868/  dih(spine) > 2.3 ==> gamma4L(cell) > 0.0057 {{{GRAD}}}
 * /QITNPEA/ 4-blade inequalities:  (cc:4bl in tex) 
    * ID/5653753305/  j=4-quarter inequality {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/9939613598/ j=3-quarter, gammaL(4-cell nonquarter) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/4003532128/ j=3-quarter gamma23Lwt(23-cell) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/6206775865/ j=3 quarter gammaL(quarter) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/3848804089/ j=2 quarters, gammaL(quarter) (small blade case) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/2134082733/ j=2 quarters, gamma4Lbwt(4-cell) (small blade case) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/9063653052/ j=2 quarters gamma4Lbwt(4-cell) (big blade case) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/5400790175/ j=1 or 2 quarters gamma4Lbwt + gamma3L > 0.0057 (small blade case) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/5814748276/ j=1 quarter gammaL(quarter) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/3803737830/ j=1 quarter gamma4Lbwt(4-cell nonquarter) {{{GRAD}}}
 * /ZTGIJCF/ 5-blade inequalities:  (cc:5bl in tex) 
    * ID/1821661595/  gammaL >= a + b azim (4-cell) {{{GRAD}}}
    * ID/7907792228/  gammaL >= a + b azim (2+3-cell) {{{GRAD}}}

= Tau Estimates =
 * The second derivatives are negative, allowing heights to be adjusted (cc:d2a, cc:d2b in tex files).  {{{STATUS_NV}}}
 * A quadrilateral can be deformed (cc:qua in tex files) {{{STATUS_NV}}}
 * Tau estimates for each partition (cc:tau in tex files) {{{STATUS_NV}}}

= Minor Linear programs =

 * /FUSDSPJ/  Tameness constants b(p,q).  There is a collection of inequalities for triangles and quadrilaterals relating tau and azim.   This includes dihedral angle bounds for triangles, quadrilaterals and exceptional regions.  {{{STATUS_NV}}}

= Major Linear Programs =

= Packings with Full Contact = 