#summary The text part of the flyspeck formalization project is nearly complete.
#labels Featured

= Introduction =

The text part of the formalization project is now nearly complete.
The following individuals have contributed lemmas to the text project:

  * Dang Tat Dat
  * Hales, Thomas C. 
  * Harrison, John 
  * Hoang Le Truong
  * Nguyen Tat Thang
  * Nguyen Quang Truong
  * Rute, Jason 
  * Solovyev, Alexey
  * Thi Trieu Diep
  * Tran Nam Trung
  * Vu Khac Ky
  * Vu Thanh
  * Vuong Anh Quyen

(Numerous others
have made contributions to the code project.)


= The Last 32 Pages =

As of June 23, 2011, there were 32 pages left of the text formalization project.  This page tracks
the status of these final pages.  LP=lines of proof in the English text (488 total).

 * Lines left
    * 488 (June 23 2011)
    * 367 (Jan 28 2012)
    * 295 (May 15 2012)

 * ~~Hypermap Chapter (0 pages)~~
    * ~~CTJYKFZ (8 LP) -- added 5/3/2012~~ not needed -- AS proved CRTTXAT without it.

 * ~~Fan Chapter (0 pages)~~
    * ~~JLIGZGS (14 LP)~~
    * ~~AMHFNXP (26 LP)~~ -- HLT 7/30/2011
    * ~~WBLARHH (3 LP)~~ -- HLT 7/30/2011
    * ~~BSXAQBQ (1 LP)~~ -- HLT 7/30/2011
    * ~~FLVNSME (15 LP)~~ -- HLT 7/30/2011
    * ~~CFYXFTY (30 LP) --  overlooked in June estimate ~~ -- HLT 3/5/2012

 * Packing Chapter (19 pages, 191 LP)
    * ~~DUUNHOR (28 LP)  --overlooked in June 2011 estimate~~ -- AS 8/2011
    * ~~SLTSTLO (12 LP) ~~-- VKK 7/2011
    * ~~RVFXZBU (14 LP)~~-- VKK 12/2011
    * ~~URRPHBZ (2 LP)~~-- VKK 12/2011
    * ~~QZYZMJC (1 LP)~~-- VKK 1/12/2012
    * ~~GRUTOTI (10 LP)~~-- VKK 3/14/2012
    * ~~KIZHLTL (26 LP)~~-- VKK 5/10/2012
    * ~~TSKAJXY (1 LP -- computer calculation)~~-- VKK/TCH 1/24/2013
    * OXLZLEZ (7 LP -- computer calculation)
    * ~~UPFZBZM (16 LP)~~ -- VKK 5/15/2012
    * ~~RDWKARC (5 LP)~~ -- VKK 5/15/2012
    * ~~EUSOTYP (23 LP) ~~--TCH 2/7/2012
    * ~~GOTCJAH (30 LP) ~~-- TCH 10/2012
    * ~~DLWCHEM (30 LP) ~~-- TCH 11/2012
    * ~~XULJEPR (14 LP) ~~-- TCH 11/2012

 * ~~Packing Chapter (added Dec 2011 to show that Marchal cells partition space)~~
    * ~~HDTFNFZ (8 LP)~~-- VKK 12/2011
    * ~~NJIUTIU (10 LP)~~-- VKK 12/31/2011
    * ~~TEZFFSK (11 LP)~~-- VKK 12/31/2011
    * ~~YNHYJIT (9 LP)~~-- VKK 12/31/2011
    * ~~QZKSYKG (7 LP)~~-- VKK 1/9/2012
    * ~~DDZUPHJ (15 LP)~~-- VKK 1/9/2012
    * ~~AJRIPQN (9 LP)~~-- VKK 1/9/2012

 * Local Fan Chapter (8 pages, 172 LP)
    * ~~EGHNAVX (26 LP)~~
    * ~~RNSYJXM (6 LP)~~ -- AS 5/7/2013
    * ~~XRECQNS (15 LP)~~ -- NQT, JH 9/2012
    * ~~MHAEYJN (46 LP)~~ -- NQT, 7/1/2013
    * ZLZTHIC  --
    * ~~EJRCFJD (17 LP)~~ -- NQT 6/2012
    * ~~NKEZBFC (7 LP)~~ -- HLT 8/2011
    * ~~BGMIFTE (36 LP)~~ -- JH 6/2012
    * ~~WSEWPCH (25 LP)~~ -- JH 5/2013

 * Tame Hypermap Chapter (2 pages, 66 LP)
    * ~~FNJLBXS (35 LP)~~ -- AS 9/2012
    * ~~FCDJDOT (10 LP)~~ -- AS 9/2012
    * ~~KCBLRQC (21 LP)~~ -- AS 6/26/2013




= The Fine Print =

 * The 32 pages do not include the parts of the text (such as remarks, introductory passages, and auxiliary results)  that are not strictly a  part of the proof of the Kepler conjecture.
 * It does not include the parts of the Kepler conjecture that lie outside the text.  That is, it does not include the computer portions of the proof.
 * Also excluded are three specific sections of the text that give the relationship between the text and the computer portions of the proof.
 * The section on the strong dodecahedral conjecture is excluded.